1. Question
Global migration has only economic consequences for society. Evaluate this view. [35]
"Although there is a long history of people moving around the world, global migration has increased significantly with globalisation and improved technology. As countries of the world become more interconnected, so people move around the world. The movement of people to other countries can have economic consequences both for the country they join and for the country they leave and these consequences can be both positive and negative. However, the view that global migration has only economic consequences can be questioned due to the cultural and political consequences of migration.
One major economic consequence of global migration is that the host country will benefit from the labour provided by migrants. Following the Second World War, many European countries had a shortage of labour, particularly in manufacturing industries. To overcome this shortage countries looked to other countries, particularly less developed countries, to provide labour. In many cases, labour came from previously colonised countries. The workers were often required for heavy manual low-skilled jobs that those who lived in the country did not want. Borjas points out that in many cases the low-skilled jobs taken by economic migrants are casual and seasonal and so not taken up by indigenous workers due to the insecurity of the work. In this way, global migration has a positive economic consequence for the host country by providing a workforce for jobs that otherwise would face labour shortages. Marxists would argue that in this way, migrant workers are forming a reserve army of labour that has the effect of reducing wages. While this is positive for capitalism, it may be negative for the workforce as employers are able to keep wages lower as they do not have to raise wages to attract workers from the domestic workforce.
Not all migrants are low-skilled workers. The British NHS, for example, relies heavily on migrant workers. According to Hann et. al, 42% of doctors joining the NHS between 1992 and 2005 had obtained their medical qualifications outside of the UK. This migration of working age high-skilled and high wage workers can have positive economic consequences as they are likely to contribute more through taxation than receive through social services. In the USA, the Congress Commission on Immigration Reform (1997) concluded that overall immigration into the USA had a positive effect on the US economy as migrants made a significant tax contribution and they mainly spent their spare cash on US goods.
However, while the economic consequences may be positive for the recipient country, they may be negative for the country that the migrants leave behind. The ‘brain drain’ is a term often used to describe the effect where developing societies lose their most talented and educated citizens who move to well paid jobs often in Western Europe, the USA, Japan and Australia. For example, Koser found that only 50 out of the 600 doctors trained in Zambia since 2020 are practising medicine in Zambia. This brain drain can impede the process of economic development in developing countries and so has negative economic consequences.
Global migration may also have positive economic consequences for the countries from which people migrate due to the value of remittances. Remittances are cross-border transfers of money from workers in one country back to their country of origin, often through payments to family members. Many migrant workers send payments such as these back to extended families in their country of origin, contributing positively to the economy in those countries. The World Bank estimates that around 80% of all global remittances went to less industrialised countries. The amount being transferred is nearly half a trillion US dollars which is around double the amount of global development aid.
Global migration does clearly have economic consequences both for the country that people move from and the country that people move to. However, this does not mean that it has only economic consequences for society. Indeed, there are also social, political, and cultural consequences to migration.
Remittances, for example, do not only have economic consequences. Hanlon and Vicino highlight the social consequences of remittances as in households receiving remittances from abroad, children are less likely to drop out of school and the health of children tends to be better too. While the practice may largely be driven by economics, its impacts spread beyond simply supporting the economy. Likewise, while people may become migrants for economic reasons, the consequences for them individually span far beyond economics. They may have to leave friends and family behind to begin a life in a new country. Massy argues that due to this, migrants often form networks in the countries they move to. This can facilitate the process of settlement and also provide support and employment opportunities. Developing a social network due to migration is another clear social consequence.
Despite the economic advantages that global migrants may bring to a country, immigration is often a political issue in many countries. For many countries the arrival of immigrants who have different lifestyles and beliefs created demands for immigrants to assimilate. Immigrants were encouraged to adopt the culture of the host country including language and values. This proved a problem as migrants were not willing to abandon their culture. Multiculturalism was the view that immigrants should be able to retain their culture. This became the preferred policy for many countries as attempts at assimilation had proved unsuccessful. However, subsequently there have been renewed calls for assimilation following events such as 9/11 in America and terror attacks in the UK. Another social consequence of migration is that the news media of receiving countries have negatively represented immigrants as a social problem. Research by the information Centre about Asylums and Refugees observed that newspapers across Europe have constructed an image of migrants as a problem or threat to the identity and cohesion of European societies. In this way, the news media are creating a moral panic about immigration which may further fuel fascism, hostility and hate crimes. These are all clear social and political consequences that result from migration.
Migration can also have positive cultural consequences. It can lead to greater cultural diversity, with people from different cultures living alongside each other. While this may create tensions at times, it also leads to greater understanding of others and widens people’s horizons. Bourn argues that young people living in societies in which migration and cultural hybridity are the norm are the social group most likely to be open to the idea of adopting a global identity. They are also more likely to be involved in digital global networks and movements against global inequality. Global migration can therefore have positive cultural consequences too.
Overall, although many migrants move for economic reasons the consequences of migration are more than just economic. Global migration clearly has economic consequences for both the host nations and the home nations of migrants. However, alongside these consequences there are also political and social consequences of global migration."

2. Question
The hypodermic syringe model provides the best explanation of media effects. Evaluate this view. [35]
"There are several different models that explain the effects that the media can have on their audiences. These models differ in their explanation of the extent of the effect of the media on their audiences. The hypodermic syringe model suggests that media messages are injected into their audience like a drug. The two-step flow model suggests that messages pass through stages before they are accepted by audience. Whereas, the uses and gratifications model suggests that people are active consumers of the media.
The hypodermic syringe was an early model of media effects. As the name implies, this model suggests that the media is like a drug being injected into the audience. The model therefore claims that the audience are passive recipients of media messages. An example of this model in action was seen in 1938 when a radio broadcast of H. G. Wells’ War of the Worlds caused mass hysteria as members of the public who heard it thought it was real and that the earth was being invaded by Martians. Although this so-called proof of the effect of the media was questioned by some it still served to validate the theory that audiences passively accept messages from the media.
Some sociologists have argued that the media can have a similar effect by inducing political, physical and mental apathy. Marcuse described how the media has a ‘hypnotic power’ to deprive us of our capacity for critical thought. In this way, the audience are passive and the media have a direct influence upon them. For Marcuse this direct influence is to induce apathy and prevent people from changing the world.
Laboratory studies conducted by psychologists can also be seen as evidence to support the hypodermic syringe model. Bandura, Ross and Ross studied simple cause-and-effect relationships between a media message and the audience response. They concluded that film images were as effective in teaching aggression as real-life models, particularly in boys. Studies such as these influenced the social learning approach in psychology. This approach argues that people learn behaviours through observing and imitating others. The idea that this observation can happen through the media supports the hypodermic model of media effects.
A further variation on the basic hypodermic syringe model is the idea that media effects are cumulative, rather than immediate. For example, the idea that prolonged exposure to violent films or games can result in violent behaviour and desensitisation to violence. Belson, for example, claimed that prolonged exposure to media violence produced violent behaviour in young males.
In recent times the focus of direct effects models has moved away from general audiences and towards the idea of vulnerable audiences, children in particular. The argument here is that their lack of experience and tendency to imitate makes children more susceptible to direct media effects.
One weakness of the hypodermic syringe model is that it ignores the influence of other people on our interpretation of the media. In reality, people do not simply accept everything passively, there is some process of interpretation and other people can be particularly influential upon this process. The two-step flow model developed by Katz and Lazarsfeld attempt to address this weakness. This model suggests that within social networks there are ‘opinion leaders’ who are those who influence others and have strong ideas. Opinion leaders will consume a range of media, form opinions on these issues and then pass these on to others in their social group. This means that the views of other people, and particularly those whose views are respected, shape how an individual responds to the media. This model seems to fit well with how advertising works on social media. People with large numbers of followers on social media are paid significant amounts of money to give positive opinions on products. They are being targeted as opinion leaders and paid for their influence on the views of others. The two-step flow model is a better model of media effects as it recognises that our interpretation of the media is influenced by social interaction.
Subsequent theories of the media effects tend to see the audience as less passive in their consumption of the media. Such models tend to look at how audiences use the media rather than the media’s effect on audiences. Blumler and McQuail’s uses and gratifications model looks to explain the way audiences use the media to satisfy their needs. This means that the uses will differ from group to group and will depend on the needs they have and the ways in which these needs can be gratified. Wood for example suggests teenagers will use horror films as a way of gaining excitement. Blumler and McQuail suggested four needs that may be met by the media. The first is diversion, to escape from everyday life. The second is personal relationships, we may need media due to our loss of community. Thirdly is personal identity, audiences may relate to characters to help them form their identity. Finally, the media may act as surveillance, as audiences need to know what is going on in the world around them. While this model seems more realistic that the hypodermic syringe model in its recognition that audiences do not consume all media in the same way, it does not offer much in terms of explaining how the media affects the audience. Indeed, the model could be interpreted to mean that the media are powerless in their ability to influence behaviour. The model also seems to assume that these needs are pre-existing and the media is simply filtered through them. In reality, needs may be created by the media itself, through advertisements, or through social interaction. This model, like the hypodermic syringe model, is largely asocial, it does not take into account the cultural context that influences interpretation.
While the uses and gratifications model seems to suggest that because the audience are active the media must be having little effect, other sociologists have argued that even though the audience are active the media may still be influencing them, just in less direct and obvious ways than the hypodermic syringe model suggests. The cultural effects model looks at media effects from a neo-Marxist viewpoint. This model suggests that if audiences are constantly exposed to media messages, they will begin to internalise the ideas that are being given to them from the media. The Glasgow University Media Group, a left-wing group of sociologists, suggest that models that suggest the audience are active fail to recognise the enormous power of the media to influence opinions of audiences. The suggestion here is that in many cases audiences will have little information about a topic and so will rely on the media to supply that information. An example of this is the portrayal of benefit fraud in the media. The media’s portrayal of the extent of benefit fraud has led to an assumption amongst audiences that this problem is far larger than the reality. This model then sees the real power of the media in its ability to become part of an audience’s cultural background through advising and guiding audiences and in doing so exercising ideological control.
It is clear that the hypodermic syringe model is a simplistic model of media effects. Audiences are not entirely passive as the model suggests, and other models seem better able to account for ways that audiences may actively interpret and make sense of the media. For this reason, the hypodermic syringe model is not the best model of media effects. However, the amount of money spent globally on advertising would suggest that businesses at least believe that the media are able to have a significant influence upon an audience’s behaviour and opinions. While this influence may often not be direct and immediate, it may be that the media is still be able to infiltrate the beliefs and behaviour of the audience, particularly on issues with which they have no personal experience."

3. Question
Religion supports the interests of the rich and powerful. Evaluate this view. [35]
"Conflict theorists argue that religion supports the interest of the rich and powerful. For Marxists, religion supports the interests of the bourgeoisie, the group with power due to their ownership of the means of production. Feminists agree that religion supports the interests of the powerful, but for them religion supports the interests of men rather than those of a capitalist class.
Marxists see religion as an ideology that distorts people’s perception of reality in capitalist society. Marxists argue that we live in a capitalist society where the bourgeoisie (ruling-class) exploit the proletariat (working-class). Marx argued that religion is an ideological weapon used by the ruling-class to disguise their exploitation of the proletariat and to prevent the proletariat from recognising its own interests. Marx described religion as ‘the opium of the people’. By this, he meant that religion is like a drug that both dulls the pain of exploitation and prevents the working-class from improving their situation. Marx argued that religion dulls the pain of oppression by promising a paradise of eternal life for those who follow their religious duties. Religion also justifies the social order by providing an overall narrative for why the world is as it is. In this way religion presents the social structure as God-given and inevitable. Religion also dulls the pain of oppression by offering a hope of supernatural intervention to solve problems. Religion’s followers can pray for help with problems they face and this hope can make the present more acceptable.
At the same time, religion prevents the proletariat from improving their situation by acting as a mechanism of social control. Marx described how religion preaches submissiveness and humbleness. In this way, religion keeps people in their place and prevents them from improving their situation. In this way, Marxists see religion as a conservative force – it acts to maintain society as it is. By preventing the proletariat from seeing how they could truly improve their situation, religion contributes to a false class consciousness. It blinds the workers from their true situation and diverts their attention from the true source of their problem – the system of capitalism.
There is a wealth of historical evidence that can be seen to support the Marxist view of religion. The caste system of traditional India was justified by Hindu religious beliefs. Likewise, in medieval Europe, kings and queens were seen to rule by divine right. In the USA during the era of slavery, slave owners often encouraged the conversion of slaves to Christianity, seeing it as a controlling influence that helped to prevent them from fighting against slavery. Similarly, in England during the industrial revolution employers used religion as a means of controlling the masses and encouraging them to remain sober and work hard. Overall, these examples support the idea that religion is a conservative force that serves the interests of those in positions of power.
However, Marx has been criticised as in some situations religion can be force for social change. Gramsci, a neo-Marxist, argues that some clergy may help to challenge ruling-class hegemony in society by acting as organic intellectuals. For example, Billings studied two sets of workers in the 1920s and 1930s who were both religious. He points out that organic intellectuals helped miners, one of the groups, to rebel against the status quo as they were more rebellious. Religion provided the organic intellectuals to give leadership, organisation and support to the miners.
Feminists agree with Marxists that religion serves the interests of the powerful, but they see religion as helping to maintain male domination of society. Feminists argue that religion is patriarchal and legitimises women’s subordination. For example, sacred texts are often filled with male gods or prophets and the women in the Bible are often portrayed to be evil such as Eve eating the fruit first causing humanity’s expulsion for the Garden of Eden. Places of worship often segregate the sexes with women sometimes seated behind a screen. Religions may not allow women to take higher offices in a religion, for example in Catholicism women are not allowed to be priests. Also, religious laws and customs have stopped women from having full rights. Women may not have access to divorce or may have to dress in a particular way such as wearing a hijab. Therefore, feminists argue that women are treated unfairly in religion and religion performs an ideological function of supporting patriarchy. As such this supports the powerful, in this case men.
However, some sociologists argue that religion can be supportive to women. For example, the hijab can be seen as a sign of liberation which allows Muslim women to enter the public sphere or join higher education. Religious feminists also argue that religion can enable women to gain status and respect for their domestic role. For example, Pentecostalism has strong beliefs that men should respect women. Women can use this belief to ensure they do not face oppression from husbands.
Some sociologists disagree with the general view of conflict theories that religion supports the interests of the rich and powerful. Malinowski, an anthropologist, suggests that religion provides psychological benefits to individuals by reducing anxiety and tension. In this way religion benefits individuals and also benefits society as a whole through mitigating stresses that could threaten the social order. Malinowski argued that this can be seen clearly in times of crisis as in all societies birth, marriage and death are surrounded by religious rituals. Malinowski also argued that religion relieves anxiety in important but unpredictable situations. He used an example from his fieldwork with the Trobriand Islanders to illustrate this function. Trobriand Islanders are fishermen. When fishing in lakes they were relatively safe and relied only on their skill and not on religious ritual. However, when the Trobrianders went fishing in the ocean they performed rituals before the trip. This was due to the increased dangers of ocean fishing. These examples highlight that religion can be used to support all members of a society, not just the rich and powerful.
Religion may perform positive functions for society as a whole rather than just for the benefit of the rich and powerful. For example, functionalists argue that religion unites people in a social solidarity through a value consensus which is the shared norms and values in society. Functionalists use the example of totemism. Durkheim studied the Arunta tribe who came together to worship a symbol known as a totem. By worshipping the totem, the tribe were united. Durkheim considered this worship to show the tribe actually worshipped the society. This shows that religion does not always serve the rich and powerful but performs the function of bringing a society together, which benefits everyone within the society.
In conclusion, religion can be seen to support the rich and powerful by supporting capitalism and patriarchy. Religion often justifies the suffering of either the lower class or women by persuading these groups that their suffering is God’s plan rather than due to the oppression of either the ruling-class or men. However, this does neglect the many ways in which religion can be a positive experience for all, rather than just the rich or powerful."

4. Question
Describe two functions of the family. [4]
"One function of the family is primary socialisation. The family is the first place where children learn the norms and values of society from their parents.
Another function of the family is the stabilisation of adult personalities. The family provides emotional support and a place where adults can act out childish elements of their own personalities while playing with children."

5. Question
Explain two ways in which the family supports capitalism, according to Marxist theory. [8]
"One way the family supports capitalism is by performing an ideological function. This means the family teaches beliefs and attitudes that support capitalism. Cooper argues that within the family children are taught to submit to authority – by learning to obey their parents they are trained to be part of the obedient workforce that capitalism requires.
Another way in which the family supports capitalism is through providing comfort and support. The family is a safe haven which soothes the frustration of being exploited in the capitalist workplace. Ansley describes the family as a ‘safety valve’ as the wife will absorb the frustration of her exploited husband meaning that his frustration is not turned against the system and so capitalism is not threatened."

6. Question
Explain two limitations of the Marxist view of the family.[6]
"One limitation of the Marxist view of the family is that it ignores the positive aspects of the family. Marxists focus on the fact that the family controls the ideas of workers to make them accept their oppression. According to functionalists, this does not take in to account the benefits that the family offers to its members and society. The family provides positive functions such as providing economic support for its members.
Another limitation of the Marxist view of the family is that it is unable to account for family diversity. Marxists argue that the family exists simply to support capitalism. However, sociologists recognise that there are lots of different types of families and family structures and this diversity is growing. It is hard to explain this growing diversity if the family is there simply to perform one function."

7. Question
Family diversity is positive for society. Explain this view. [10]
"One way in which family diversity is positive for society is that it provides individuals with greater freedom and choice. Family diversity means individuals are able to choose from a range of different ways of living. Without one dominant family type, there is the opportunity to have greater freedom due to the fragmented range of structures. For example, individuals can choose whether to marry or have children. Beck and Beck-Gernsheim argue that we are now able to live in ‘families of choice’ or ‘negotiated families’. One example may be cohabiting couples who choose to live together but without being married. Another example is friends of parents being considered as aunties or uncles despite having no blood relation. Choice and freedom are key elements of postmodern society and postmodernists see these as vital in a society based on individualism.
Another way in which family diversity is positive for society is that it increases tolerance and encourages people to be accepting of different ways of living. Exposure to new ideas makes people question traditional ways of thinking and so exposure to family diversity means that people no longer see the traditional nuclear family as the only ‘right’ type of family. Roseneil describes how the ‘heteronorm’ – the belief that relationships between heterosexual couples are the normal form for intimate relationships to take – is breaking down in many societies due to the increase in gay and lesbian families."



8. Question
Family diversity is positive for society. Using sociological material, give one argument against this view.[6]
"New Right theorists argue that family diversity is not positive for society because the traditional nuclear family is the best family structure for society, and that other structures, particularly lone-parent families, lead to poor socialisation and welfare dependency. New Right theorists argue that lone-parent families are unable to adequately socialise children as they lack a male parental figure and so children grow up without discipline and clear moral guidance. This, they argue, leads to delinquency and criminality. Similarly, as they lack a male wage earner, single parent families are often reliant on financial support from the state. Children grow up in families without a wage earner and see welfare dependency as normal. Charles Murray argues that state support for lone-parent families through welfare benefits has resulted in an ‘underclass’ which poses a threat to society through rising crime and welfare spending."

9. Question
Evaluate the contribution of different feminist perspectives to our understanding of the family. [26]
"Feminists argue that the family oppresses women. There are a range of different feminist views, but all agree that there is gender inequality in society and that this is also present in the family. Different feminist views focus on different ways in which women face oppression in the family, liberal feminists look to campaign for equal rights, Marxist feminists argue capitalism oppresses women and radical feminists see the family as the root of women’s oppression.
Liberal feminists believe that a change is possible both in society and the family. Their view is that for women to have a better position in both society and the family, women need to campaign for changes to attitudes and to the law. Liberal feminists note that there have been improvements for women for example in employment where legislation such as the Sex Discrimination Act has meant women have better opportunities in society. With these better opportunities, liberal feminists suggest that women can improve their position in the family. Like the march of progress theory of Young and Wilmott, liberal feminists suggest that although there is not equality in the family there has been progress. Evidence for this is that men are taking on more domestic labour and childcare duties.
However, the view of liberal feminists would be criticised by black feminists, in their view the progress made by women is often confined to white, middle-class women. Black feminists suggest that rather than the family being a site of oppression for women it can actually be a haven against the racism of wider society. Black feminists note that the experience of black women in society is often very different to other women and that there cannot be one version of feminism that explains women’s experience of the family.
Marxist feminists take a different view of the family. Like the Marxist view of society, Marxist feminists look at the role of capitalism in oppressing women. Marxist feminists argue that the family helps to maintain capitalism in several ways. Firstly, women in the family perform unpaid domestic labour and so support the labour force who serve capitalism by selling their labour. Additionally, women in the family relieve the frustration of exploited men. Ansley describes how after a hard day at work a man will return to his family and the woman will help relieve his anger and frustration and prepare him for another day at work. Finally, women also act as reserve army of labour. This means women are available to work of the capitalist system, as and when it requires them. An example was seen during the war when men were away fighting women worked but returned to the domestic role when no longer needed. For Marxists feminists, the only way for women to escape from the oppression of the family is through a socialist revolution to abolish capitalism.
The Marxist feminist view of the family has been criticised by functionalists who see it as overly negative. Parsons would agree with Ansley that the family helps men to be productive members of the workforce. However, where Ansley sees this in negative terms through male dominance and even domestic violence, Parsons argues that this is through the ‘stabilisation of adult personalities’ - a positive process through which women emotionally support men with love and empathy. Overall functionalists would argue that the family does not simply benefit capitalism but benefits family members too.
Radical feminists see the major division in society as that between men and women. For radical feminists the family is a key institution of the patriarchal society. Men benefit from the domestic work carried out by women and the sexual satisfaction they gain from their wives. The services women perform for their husbands are key to women’s oppression according to radical feminists. They see that the only way women can escape their oppression is to escape from the family. Greer, for example, has pointed out that single women are generally happier than married women.
A common criticism of radical feminism is that it exaggerates the exploitation of women in the family. Somerville, for example, argues that most women value their relationships with men and that the bulk of male-female relationships are based on mutual love and respect rather than exploitation. Radical feminists also ignore that many women see family and motherhood as fulfilling and rewarding.
Overall, there are a range of different feminist views and they differ in their views of the inequalities that women face and the solutions they propose for gender equality. However, the key contribution of all feminist approaches has been to highlight forms of patriarchy and oppression experienced by women and to add a counterweight to the ‘malestream’ theories that have otherwise dominated in sociology."

10. Question
Evaluate the view that transnational organisations have led to an increase in global inequality. [35]
"Globalisation is a process that through the speed of its occurence transforms the nature of other processes and leads to events That have global consequences. One consequence of globalisation is the development of transnational organizations, They operate across national boarders. Some of them are governmental ,such as IMF and others are independent (can be called 'civil society organizations') of the state. Transnational organizations also involve large businesses operating in the global market. Some sociologists believe that transnational companies have contributed to an increase in global inequality. this essay will evaluate this statement.
Firstly, one argument that supports the view that transnational organizations indeed have led to an increase in the gap between rich and poor is the exploitation of labour in developing countries by developed nations. The workforce in developing countries is very attractive for business owners because it tends to be cheap. As capitalism promotes the importance of 'money success' capitalists are trying to save on everything in order to maximise their profits. This leads to poor working conditions and bad salaries for employees. As a consequence, workers in developing countries are exploited and global In 1996, the Life Magazine posted a picture of young boy from Pakistan. His name was Tariq and reportedly he was sewing Nike clothes for just 60 cents per day. This is an example of a large famouse TNC Nike exploiting child labour. The company did not take liabilities and claimed that they were unaware of the age of workers. As a consequence, global TNCs are exploiting cheap labour and so increasing global inequality.
Secondly, there are also examples where NGOs are contributing to the global inequality Even though NGOs should be civil society organisations they sometimes also exploit people in hard life-situations. In 2018 The Times posted an investigation about NGO Oxfam exploiting victims of the Haiti earthquake in 2010. The victims were in a hard situation as many of them lost their homes, relatives, money, belongings, etc. The Oxfam workers (mostly white, middle class, European) took advantage of their superior position and so it was found out that they were sexually harrassing female victims, physically verbally abusing them and children. This horrible example shows that developed nations working in virtuous organizations that are aimed to help victims also mistreat them and so increase the global inequality.
Thirdly, governmental organisations such as the IMF and the World Bank have a list of structural adjustment programs (SAPs) that developing countries have to adopt in order to receive assistance. According to Hong, those SAPs are damaging for domestic economies. For example, most common SAPs are privatisation and trade liberation. Due to the fact that developing countries do not have neither resources nor technologies to produce products of secondary sector they focus on agriculture in which they have a comparative advantage in. This leads to abandonment of diverse crops for domestic consumption and a switch to cash crops such as coffee and cotton which can be sold in developed countries. This policies only benefit developed notions as they get cheaper primary products. Hong argues that these policies lead to more unemployment and corruption in the long-run for developing countries. For instance, Hanlon observed the policies given to Sierra Leone by the World Bank, the suggested austerity measures had led to cuts on spending on education. As a result, many young people did not have any career prospects which caused social unrest and contributed to the civil war in 1990s. Therefore, governmental organization can also increase global inequality through poor SAPs.
Moreover, Madeley suggests that TNCs can exploit their size and power to influence governments especially in developing countries. For example, in 2009 The Royal Dutch Shell paid $15 million, without addmitting liability, to settle a lawsuit alledging that it paid Nigerian government for the police to silence those who were criticizing company's actions. This shows that TNCs can be more powerful than some developing governments, therefore, leading to worse living standards of the citizens.
On the other hand, NGOs can sometimes be helpful and perform even better than governmental organisations: Due to the fact that there are so many NGOs they can specialise on very unique tasks and be the best in them. E.g. NGO 'Excellent' has helped the population of East Africa to build sand damps. They used natural resources. Sand damps were filtering the water. As a consequence, children were able to go to school instead of trying to find water. Therefore, NGOs can improve living standards in developing countries and so decrease global inequality.
Furthermore, some sociologists argue that TNCs can be beneficial for developing nations and some economists believe that the TNC-led strategy is the best way of development. According to Aisbett, even though TNCs are harmful in the majority's mind especially for developing nations, they infact offer many benefits to developing countries. For example when TNCs open up their branches in developing countries they create a lot of workplaces. Unemployment decreases, people earn more, so have more disposable income which they reinvest to the economy and create more output from other firms because demand increases. Also, TNC-led growth is rapid because they are already established firms that can benefit from economies of scale and they transfer technologies and techniques from abroad which results in more training and more educated workforce.
In addition, Dalmiya and Schultink argue that the World Bank and WHO have enormousely contributed to raising nutritional standards in developing countries and combating diseases. According to WHO Africa has 25% of global diseases burden and only 3% of healthcare workers. Therefore, some international WHO staffs was sent to Africa in order to improve living standards there.
In conclusion, there are many examples where transnational organisations behaved inappropriately by valuing only their own interests. However, it might be the problem of individuals as there are also examples where TNCs, WHO, and the World Bank are benefitting developing nations and in some cases without asking anything in return (WHO staff in Africa). Therefore, transnational organisations had a different impact on the global inequality."

11. Question
Evaluate the view that global migration has only negative consequences for developing countries. [35]
"Global migration refers to the Process of which migrants leave There home countries and migrate to different Countries for a wide variety Of Reasons Such as want more job opportunities. It can be argued that this process of global migration has positive + negative Consequences for developing countries.
Firstly, in support of this view it can be argued that Global migration removes Skilled Workers from developing countries and relocates Them to developed Countries. This leaves developing Countries without Skilled Workers and puts them in a position where they are reliant on other nation States to provide assistance There Skilled Workers Could have provided. Such as Doctors + Nurses. This is termed The 'Brain Drain' and it prevents developing countries from Continuing to develop as global migration moves The 'brains' of There Society. Only 5% of trained Doctors in Zimbabwe actually work in Zimbabwe. This shows how much Of a negative effect The brain Drain is having on developing countries, which is caused by global migration.
Global optomists would subvert This as they suggest that Skilled workers are likely to return to There home Country after temporary migration. This Lets them provide more skills + Knowledge to The developing country.
Alternatively, it can be argued that global migration has a positive effect on developing Countries. Through global migration Comes The spread of Liberal & westernised Values. In developing Countries it is often found That They hold traditional and sometimes damaging views for example Sexist views on Women and The opression of self expression. Baum Suggests That migrants adapt to There New culture and create Social Solidarity. They are Then able to Spread These Views Through technology with Their home Country and also When They return. This liberates people Who are opressed by traditional Values. Parsons suggests That countries cannot develop if They obtain traditional Values That hold Them back. Therefore Through global migration + The Spread of liberal values it helps The Countries develop.
Global pessimists would argue That This Simply isn't realistic. This is a 1 Size fits all Soloution and indigenous cultures Won't adapt.
Furthermore, in Support of This View it can be argued That global migration is contributing to westernisation. The Spread of Western Values + beliefs is damaging other cultures, making Them feel/seem inferior. Through This 'Superiority' of westernisation traditional idigenous Cultures are being erased. Seawall Argues That westernisation makes other cultures Seem inferior and is a negative process. Developing Countries loose there identities and Sense of pride. This Lowers Self esteem + patrotic views Which are key in helping development. Therefore, global migration is making developing Countries Cultures inferior. Llasa disagrees with This as She argues That a homogonised Culture actually prevents war. So it is a positive process.
On The other hand, many would argue That global migration has a positive effect on developing countnies because migrants are able to make money in There migrated country and Send The money back home to improve life in The home country. Hoschild terms this 'global care Chains' The process Where typicelly Women generate Savings Through Working in The more developed Countries and Send money back to friends + family and it improves life in The developing Countries. This suggests That global migration is a positive process as it financially benefits LEDC.
Pessimists would Counter This by suggesting That migrants actually Start new lives and leave There Previous lives behind. Providing financial benefit to There new 'homes'.
Alturnetively, in support of This View it can be argued That global migration leads to negative stereotyping of minorities/migrants. When migrants relocate they are often termed as 'foreigeners' and 'burdens'. This stereotyping falls on There home Countries and negatively labels Them too. for example Poole Argues That Islam is villanised by The Western media and This has a effect on There home Countries. Islam is often assosiated with developing Countries. Canning argues That This mistreatment of migrants + home Countries is a negative process.
However, it can be argued That this is simply a minority Who attach These labels. Many migrants are accepted along With There religion + Culture.
Lastly, in opposition to The view it Can be argued That global migration is positive because it increases global diversity and encourages acceptance. Global migration allows for indigenous Cultures and foods to Spread across The world and Create a global culture. This isn't Making anyones culture inferior but instead embraces all cultures and Creates global identity. Mcluhan refers to This as 'global Village' We embrace eachothers culture and break down barriers That Cause racism + hatrid. This is a positive process for all ethnicities/cultures. Those who hold traditional views oppose This as They believe That all cultues Shouldn't mix as it loses The countries identity.
In conclusion, it can be said that global migration does have negative effects on developing countres such as Negative stereoypes + 'brain Drain' but There are more positives That liberate the people in LEDC"

12. Question
Evaluate the view that the media has a strong influence on people’s lives today. [35]
"Media refers to the process of sharing information, technology, news and etc, via various mediums (TV, newspapers etc). On the other hand, post modernists are those school of thougue that believe media can have both a negative and positive influence in people's lives today.
Through the media models presented to us, we'll see the way media can lead to a negative impact on peoples lives, shown via the hypodermic syringe model, however, it can also show the loss of media's influence via models such as reception analysis models. These models showcase how media can influence or not influence people.
Starting off with the for side, we see the way post-modernists argue that exaggerate the influence of media on people's life. According to Katz and lazerfeld, they believe that post-modernists may take people as passive reciepients of media influence, which is not true. They back up their arguement through the two-step flow model, which highlights the fact that people are not passive reciepients of media information. They say that instead, people, through everyday social and personal conversations, look up to an 'opinion leader' – a person of influence who has exposed themselves to various media mediums – and share their view points with them. Therefore, firstly, the opinion leader internalises media content and then he shares it with people in social settings, where people may accept, reject, or modify the opinion-leader's interpretation of media content. Thus, this shows us how media has very little influence on people's life but instead people have a more adverse effect on each other.
They are critisized for having a simplistic view of the fact that ppl would always listen to opinion leaders.
Additionally, Morely talks about the fact that the influence of media is not as significant as post-modernists make it out to be. Morely argues, that people either 'selectively recall', 'selectively expose' or 'selectively interpret' media models. He backs his arguement via the reception analysis model, and argues that in modern industrial societies (MIS), people actually choose what media out they want to consume, what media they want to remember and how they want to interpret that media. He conducted a research in the 1970s, where he examined 29 groups of people, varrying from class, ethnicity and gender, who would watch the news channel 'Nationwide' on BBC. By examining and through group discussions, "everyone had different opinions on the news showcased. Thus, Morely shows the way media's influence is over-exaggerated in people's life, as people are not passive reciepients of media messages.
Morely is critisesed by McCabe who says that media can be a source of violence and not just diversion.
Lastly, Blumler and McQuail, via their uses and gratification model argue the way people use media for social, political and biological needs. They say that people consume media for reasons such as diversion which gives them the ability to escape from their everyday routine, personal identity, when people indulge in shows or entertainment platforms to make sense of who they are and for surveillance, which means that they obtain information from media and lastly for personal relationships, where people may indulge in media in order to compensate for things like a lack of company. These four sectors of the uses and gratification model highlight the fact that media is not used to have influence on people's lives, but instead it is there to provide them with entertainment and knowledge, which is important for their mental health. Therefore, media does not have a direct influence on people, as people choose what media to indulge in for various reasons.
They are critisced for believing that having an over deterministic view of ppl as of being active recipients of media.
Moving onto the against side, the hypodermic syringe model suggests that media has a lot of influence on peoples lives today. This model uses the analogy of a patient (the audience) being injected with a syringe (media content), therefore portraying individuals as passive recipients of media.
Starting off, Newson talks about the way the media has led to desensitisation amongst individuals. She argues that nowadays, people are being shown violent media, such as movies, which promote violence and ultimately makes one believe that violence is the answer of solving everyday problems. Moreover, she argues that violence has led to people empathise with villians rather than the victims. For e.g. the Palestinian Genocide that is happening currently has led a lot of people to be desensitised and supporting the Zionist agenda of ethnically-cleansing Palestinians.
Additionally, media has a strong influence over people's life as it causes them to imitate what they see on media platforms. This is supported by Bandura et al, who conducted an experiment to showcase how media has an immense effect on people. He showed 3 groups of children a media content of Bobo dolls being hit by a mallet, while he showed one group nothing. Eventually, when those children were given Bobo dolls, 3 groups hit them with mallets, while the 4th group, did not, therefore showcasing the way that imitation has a drastic effect on media influence.
Lastly, Marcuse talked about the way the media had led to this sense of 'narcotism' which would lead people to accept the ruling class ideology. The media would showcase rich people as being prosperous and in a positive light, which would ultimately lead the masses to believe that this wealth and capitalism in something to be desired.
In conclusion, we see the way media can both impact and not impact people's lives. Both sides are valid in their arguement, therefore making this topic subjected ted debate."

13. Question
Evaluate the view that governments have no control over media content. [35]
"There is an ongoing debate in sociology about who has the main control over the media content. This question is especially complicated in the modern time due to the rise of New media and more diversity and competitions in the media sphere. Some sociologists believe that nation states exert a great deal of power over the media content. this essay will evaluate this question.
Firstly, one argument that supports the view that governments have no power over media content is a rise in civil journalism. This phenomenon occured due to the new media where audiences can become content creators themselves. Anyone who has an access to the Internet can create a profile in social media e.g. YouTube and past their content which others can watch. This Civil journalism has significantly undermined the governmental control over media because it has become much harder to censor something. For example, the Arab Spring in 2011 was a massive wave of protests in muslim countries, such as Bahrain, Yemen, Egypt and others. The protests were aimed at overthrowing the unfairly elected government. Even though presidents have prohibited any mentioning of protests in the media those who were participating in them posted in Twitter and posts went viral, so it was impossible to delete them from the Internet. As a consequence, many presidents had to step down due to the protests. This shows the power of ordinary people over the media content and government censorship.
Secondly, due to the fact that media is a very competitive and diverse industry politicians nowadays acknowledge the fact that not all media sources will support them. According to Whale there is no single powerful group that controls the media but many powerful groups with different ideologies e.g. conservative and liberal parties. As a consequence Schlesinger argues contemporary politicians are very careful about what they say to media because they know how differently media can present information and how media can heavily impact voting behaviour. This shows that the control over media content is in the hands of owners and nowadays there are many media sources and Therefore owners with different values.
Also, there has been a decrease in the extent to which governments control the media content due to the 'new economic shift'. This term was coined by Davis and McAdam, they argue that nowadays media corporations had to expand their number of staff members because they started to operate across national boarders meaning that they have more news to cover and also more staff is needed to quickly adjust to new technological changes. Media corporations nowadays are owned by a large group of shareholders. For example, Twitter which was originally owned by a small group of people including its creator Mark Zuckerberg is now owned by a large number of individual and institutional shareholders. Consequently, due to the fact that there are so many people, the concentration ratio of ownership has fallen making it harder for an individual e.g. politician to bribe the company and promote his/her values.
Additionally, Martell argues that there has been a decrease of the power of the USA government because people can find alternative ideologies and critical commentary in the Internet. Due to the development of New media the content has become more interactive e.g. people can like some posts, leave their commentary under them etc. therefore, more people can express their opinion and others can read it. E.g. people might read about communism in China and devide that it is a better economic structure than capitalism. Therefore, it is harder for governments to control media content as it is impossible to prohibit comments or ban foreign websites without retaliation.
On the other hand some sociologists argue that the power of the government over media content has increased. According to Curran and his concept of 'press baron' in the past media owners were not discrete about their propagandist role. They acknowledged that they intentionally supported conservative party in the middle of 20th century. Curran suggests that nowadays media are even more propagandist but they just are not overt about it. For example, there was a famous Tony Blair's trip to Australia to meet Rupert Murdoch. After their meeting Blair has gained support from the 'Sun', which is owned by Murdoch.
Moreover there are legal barriers for media workers. For example, in the UK it is the Official Secrets Act of 1989 which makes it illegal for journalists to post about defence and international relations (secret information). If we talk about the restrictions on media consumers we can talk about the example of North Korea. In this country foreign media is completely banned. If a person is found to be using the Internet there are legal punishments for that, such as the death penalty. Therefore those examples show that a democratic government can exerts some power over the media content or an authoritarian government can control the media coverage completely.
Also, according to the traditional Marxist perspective media is an Ideological State Apparatus (Althusser) which legitimises the class inequality and helps maintain capitalist social order. It is a superstructure that rest on the economic base controlled by the ruling class. According to Marcusse media is an important agent of socialisation that creates a false consciousness by making proletariat accept their inferior position and believe in the idea that their exploitation is fair (they do not know that they are being exploited). And media by showing examples of successful working class such as Steve Jobs who started in the garage maintains the idea of fairness. Therefore, the government being the ruling class controls the media and content.
In addition, media owners' main aim to make profit. Government can be a great source of money as they tend to buy a lot of advertisms. As a consequence, through gatekeeping the GMG suggests media do not post bad information about nation states in order not to loose potential clients and profit.
In conclusion, there is some evidence that suggest that governments indeed have control over media content. Even though it might be limitted (not in the case of North Korea) but still some things such as the Official Secrets Act in the UK suggest that governments have control over media content." 

14. Question
Evaluate the Marxist theory of religion. [35]
"There have been several perspectives and viewpoints to explain the effect of Religion. Many sociologists such as Marxists have argued that religion favours the interest of the ruling and powerful class. Along with them the conflict theorists have the same viewpoint that religion and religious institutions favour the ruling class. Feminists argue that religion supports the interests of the ruling or powerful class while they believe that religion is patriarchal it still supports the more powerful one which in this case are men.
Marxists see religion as an ideology that wraps the perception of people of the society in the capitalist viewpoint. They argue that religion supports the idea of capitalism where the bourgeoisie (ruling class) are exploiting the working class. Karl Marx argues that religion doesn't allow the working class to recognise their oppression and doesn't let them improve their situation. Marx refers to religion as the 'opium of the people'. This way it suggests that religion acts as a drug which numbs bothe the pain of the oppression along with the idea that the working class can improve it's position in the society. Religion has been portrayed in such a way that the people are told to believe that social structures are god given and inevitable. The people are promised rewards and satisfaction after eternal life which helps them numb their pain. Moreover, they are given hope by making them believe that supernatural intervention might help their problems. Such ideologies favour the ruling class since it allows them to constantly exploit the working class without letting them take a stand or improve their status.
Moreover, the people of the working class are used as a mechanism of social change. Instead of letting them understand the pain and their situation the Religion keeps them in a false class consensus. They are made to believe that their position and pain is what they deserve and any effort to change it will result in more damage. The ruling class and the people in power constantly use this as an ideological weapon to exploit the working class since they know they won't rebel or show resistance to such oppresive treatment.
There are many historical evidence supporting this claim and portraying how the ruling class benefits from the idea of religion. Firstly, the unfair caste system in India shows how the people aren't allowed to change their status and if they do it will only result in punishment. Therefore, the lower class doesn't even put in the effort to improve the status. Moreover in Europe the Queens and Kings are in power and are shown to be ruling over their people. In USA during the slavery era the owners would encourage their slaves to accept Christianity so that the religion's concept about rewards in after-life will allow the slaves to accept their faith without being rebellious. Furthermore, during the industrial era in England religion was used as a source to keep the workers sober and allowed them to keep on working. Everywhere, when the ruling class can take the advantage of religion they do and then they use it to justify their oppression that the working class has to face.
Some Sociologists might argue and say that clergy can be used to challenge the ruling class if they act as organic intellectuals. A new-marxist Gramsci talked about this idea and said that religion can benefit many as well. Billings did a study on two groups from 1920s to 1930s and both the groups being religious. The organic intellectuals were able to help one group stand against the status quo. These group of minors were more rebellious and help from the organic intellectuals allowed them to fight against the status quo and oppression they were facing. This is an example that religion can favour you if used properly and understood.
Furthermore, the feminists also argue that religion and religion organisations have been patriarchal and have been supporting the powerful ones which in their case are the men. Feminists talk about how religion puts restrictions on women while it lets the men to roam around freely. Religious textbooks mostly use men as Prophets and leaders whereas the women are portrayed to be evil. An example of this is the Eve bite at the fruit which led to the Garden of Eve. More over, the women are restricted from applying to be at higher positions such as how in Catholicism women aren't allowed to be priests. In Religious like Islam women are told to wear a hijab or how women are not allowed to touch the religious book on their mensuration cycle. While women are being told what to do the guys are roaming around freely without so many restrictions and orders.
However, many sociologist would argue and say that religion can help women such as wearing the hijab can be seen as a liberation and a source of protecting women from the bad eyes of the people. Religious feminists argue that many religion have given several rights to women which they should use to stop getting punishment from their husbands. If the religious books are read closely there will be many explanations to why things are the way they are and how women can benefit from it according to their interests.
Marxists have argued that religion preaches submissiveness and hope which allows the working class to be where they are and not take action. On the other hand, functionalists such as Durkheim see religion as a binding force which is bringing together the society through shared norms and values which produces social coherion. Durkheim believes that Religion is a unifying force which allows the society to act as a whole rather than being individual. For example in cases like marriage, funerals and birth the society plays a pivotal role in such moments. In moments of stress and anxiety the society comes together as a source of comfort for others. You are able to deal with loss better if you have people who can relate with it and can understand your pain.
In conclusion, it is true that Religion gives the ruling class the favour of exploiting the working class. However, according to functionalists we can't also deny the idea that Religion can be a binding force bringing the society together and causing social coherion. Religion serves the idea of both exploitation and comfort. Some people of the society use the concept of religion to exploit while others use it to find comfort for themselves."

15. Question
Evaluate the view that religion has lost its social significance. [35]
"Religion refers to the worship of one or more a supernatural creature, particulary one or more Gods. On the other hand, social significance refers to the way social institutions such as religious institutions, educational institutes and so on, have an impact on humans and their life.
The topic of this essay is subjected to sociological debate. While some sociologists, such as Max Weber, Steve Bruce and Martin argue that religion is not socially significant in modern industrial societies (MIS), others such as Davie, Peter Berger and so on disagree with the proposition and believe that religion is still significant in MIS. Thus, this topic contains in depth arguments from both the proposition and opposition.
Starting off with the for side, Steve Bruce argues that religion is not socially significant today due to his theory of societalisation. According to Bruce, societalisation refers to the fragmentation of social life, which inherently means that people in MIS are not integrated into an unifying society and that there is a focus on personal individualism, rather than collectivism. He relates this to how religion is not acting as a unifying force anymore as society and religion are not interconnected anymore, which has led to secularisation. For example, Bruce argues that the Church no longer serves as a focal point for people. In the past, people would come to Church to celebrate religious activities and weddings, but now people do not deem these activities important enough or they simply perform these activities outside a Church. Additionally, Bruce highlights the fact that religion in the past, would give people comfort and solace, however, now, people turn to therapists to give them solace. Therefore, Bruce argues that due to modernisation, people do not deem religion as important anymore.
Bruce is criticized by Heelas who argues that religion still provides comfort to people and people are still involved in religious activities, such as Muslims getting married in Masjids.
However, Bruce criticizes Heelas as he argues that in MIS and supports the loss of religion in MIS via his theory of religious pluralism. Bruce argues that religious pluralism, which is the emergence of new sects and religious movements, have given people too much choice in choosing their religion, thus, making them confused and altogether fethers people away from religion, thus, contributing to secularisation.
Moving on, Max Weber puts out his theory of rationalisation to explain how religion has become insignificant in MIS. Weber highlights the fact that in the past, people were religiously motivated – which meant that they would perform actions based on religious beliefs. This way, they did this because they wanted to go to heaven, hence, they believed that if they lived a sin-less and God-elevating life on Earth, they would be awarded with heaven in the afterlife. However, due to the introduction industrialisation and the Enligntment period, people started to think more 'rationally' instead of looking towards religion to provide them with answers, they looked up to science and scientific answers on how to live their life. Thus, Weber calls this process as the 'Enchatment' process, where people's live were not dictated by superstition, religion and magic anymore, which ultimately led religion to lose its social significance. For example, people in the past believed that happiness could only be brought by performing religious activities (attending church), however now, people achieve happiness through mediums such as good education, physical excercise and so on. Therefore, Weber's theory of rationalisation higlights how religion has gotten insignificant in MIS.
Weber is criticized by Spickard who argues that the resurgence of new religious movements (NRMs) shows how magic, superstition and religion is still significant in MIS.
Lastly Martin puts forward his theory of disengagement to showcase how religion has less social significance today than in the past. Disengagement, according to Martin refers to the withdrawal of social religious institutions from the wider society. In other words, religion does not have social and political control over people's life now, as compared to when it did in the past. Martin backs up his arguement by stating that in the medieval times (16th Century) in the UK, the Church and the State were connected through the doctrine of the 'Divine Rights of kings', which was created by King James I. The doctrine stated that the king was also the head of state and church and no one could judge him except God himself. Therefore, people started worshipping him in a 'Godly' manner, which created this link between the state and Church. However, in MIS, the Church has separated from the state. For example, the House of Lords in the UK used to be full of religious figures dominating it, however, in MIS, there are only a few seats allocated to the archbishops. Therefore, one sees the way Martin's theory of disengagement showcases the loss of religious significance.
Martin is criticized by sociologists who argue that state and religion are still interconnected. For example, Pakistan's legislation includes a lot of Islamic laws, which ultimately controls people's life.
Evaluating the for side, we see the way the aforementioned sociologists argue that secularisation has taken place in MIS, making religion less important today.
Moving onto the against side, Davie argues that religion is still socially significant in MIS. He argues that sociologists generalise about religion lossing its significance as the only evidence of people straying away from religion is present in Europe. Davie furthers his arguement by stating that religion is still significant in countries such as Europe, Latin America, and the Middle East. People still see religion as a means of providing comfort and a sense of belonging. for example, Muslims go to the masjid, often for Friday (Jummah) prayers, which unites them and provides a sense of belonging to them. Additionally there are organisations based on conducting religious lectures, where people may go to discuss the Quran, Bible, etc. Therefore, Davie argues that religion is important in MIS. Moreover, he says that people may not be outwardly religious but that does not mean they are not inwardly religious. For e.g, in France, due to the wide spread Islamophobia, Muslims may not feel comfortable praying outside, but they may pray in their homes, thus, religion is still vital for people.
Davie is criticezed as sociologists argue that their is not sufficient evidence to back up her argument, therefore deeming it to be questionable.
Furthermore, Rodney and Bainbridge argue that the increase in religious pluralism showcases the significance for religion in MIS. They argue that religious pluralism, which is the introduction of new sects, religions, etc, allow people to pick and choose the religious belief they most relate to. For example, in MIS, many religions such as Christianity are coming up with new school of thoughts, which accept homosexuality, therefore giving space to the members of the LGBTQ+ community to resonate with these new sects and groups of Christianity, ultimately providing them with a safe religious space. Thus, this allows marginalized groups to come closer to religion. Additionally, they argue that religious pluralism is actually a positive thing as more people are now coming up with their own religious sects and organisations, which shows how religion is still important to people today.
Bruce critizes the concept of religious pluralism as he believes it creates more chaos in society.
Lastly, Peter Berger, in his work of 'de-secularisation' argues the fact that religion is still important today. According to Berger, religion is important in MIS as conflicts based on religion still exist. He gives the example of the Liberation theology, where he argues that people are still fighting for their religious rights and aim to bring religious ideology back. For example, the Iranian Revolution in the 1970s highlight the way Ayatollah Khomeini and his followers overthrew the people of Iran overthrew their western leader, as they wanted to eradicate western teachings from Iran and instead wanted to bring back Islamic values to Iran. This revolution mirrors other revolutions, which highlight the way people still care about religion and would do anything to instell these religious values in their countries.
Berger is criticized as McQuire argues that there is not a prominent link between religion and liberation, as compared to the link between religion and indoctrination, which leads to revolutions.
In conclusion, we see how both sides gives a detailed and complex arguements regarding religion and its significance. While both sides are valid, this topic still remains inconclusive, as it is subjected to debate and varies from perspective to perspective."


16. Question
Describe two ways schools may reinforce ethnic stereotypes. [4]
"One way schools may reinforce the ethnic steryotypes is by the ethnocentric curriculam which would porray ethnic minorties according to steryotypes, such as through history lessons, only referring to black history as slaves, reinforcing steryotyres of them as poor.
Another way schools may reinforce ethnic steryotypes is by teacher preception and teacher racism through sets. Teaches may place asian students in top sets reinforcing them as being 'nerdy' and putting black children in low sets due to seeing them as less able (Gillborn)."

17. Question
Explain two reasons why cultural capital may affect educational attainment. [8]
"In his theory of cultural capital Bourdieu suggested that lower class students may under achieve due to not having cultural knowledge necessary for educational attainment, such as not being able to speak in what Bernstien calls as 'Elaborated' language codes, on which school is based on. As such, educational attainment is impacted as the school is built on the culture of the middle class, and so leads to differences in educational attainment in different classes.
Another way in which a lack of cultural capital may impact educational attainment is through parent's attitudes. Middle class mothers are highly engaged in their child's education while lower class parents are unable to do so, such as what Trizad suggests is through being put off and unable to communicate with teachers due to how they present themselves. This can lead to child associating lesser value with school as they believe the same for the parent, so lower class children attain less. This may also be due to a lack of cultural knowledge that the lowerclass parent has, & thus lesser parentocracy."

18. Question
Assess the view that the education system no longer advantages males. [12]
"The argument that education system advantages males is heavily misleading as the system is tilted more toward the benefit of girls. One way this is done is through the feminisation of education, meaning education has been altered to benefit girls. This feminisation has allowed girls to achieve better academically and has widened the education gap in their favour, which is highest in the pupils of age 16. This can partly be explained by the introduction of coursework in 1988 which suited girls better. Sewell argues that girls spend more time on their work, take care of its presentation and are better at keeping deadlines. Furthermore, the dominance of female teachers and headteachers has allowed girls a range of female role models and proved that there are a range of career choices available to them, and not just the role of mothers and wives. Furthermore, Wehr argues that removed sexist stereotypes has helped girls to achieve better by opening a range of activities and careers for them, and has resulted in inversing educational attainment by them. This education actively supports girls achievement and is desinged to help them to better.
Furthermore, teachers actively perceive girls as better students than boys. They are biased toward girls as boys are more aggressive and disruptive to the class. Howard Becker argues that this theory of labelling leads to a self-fulfilling prophecy where girls consistently follow their teacher's expectations and perform better, while boys fail to deliver. McRobbie has seeked to explain the 'ideal pupil' image of girls through the concept of bedroom culture, where girls remain in their bedroom, revising and spend time in reading. Thus, quiet, passive and obedient girls are much more preferred by teachers as they are easier to discipline and work hard to achieve good grades. Thus education consistently encourages girls – sometimes at the detriment of boys – to achieve educational attainment."

19. Question
Assess the view that the education system no longer advantages males. [12]
"The statement 'the education system advantages males' can have quite a contradictory approach from what it states.
Firstly, the education system has over time lead to males being disadvantaged rather than advantaged due to many changes in the way education works. One main reason being the feminisation of education. Sociologists claim, due to the whole movement of feminism and riots for equal rights women more women have attained secondary education which has led to more women in the workforce specifically educational institutions. This has led to more females being present, giving girls an upper hand as seeing their female teachers as role models, comparetively, boys are likely to not feel as included as they may be able to relate more to male teachers as role models rather than female teachers. This can lead to girls outperforming boys in terms of GCSE's and other forms of formal education. Girls are also likely to perform better than boys due to the introduction of coursework by the 1988 education reform act as girls are usually more organised and well collected compared to boys which can also make it easier for girls to grasp the concepts taught in school better but also crack the examinations much easier.
Another reason the education system may not advantage the males could be due to stereotypes of girls and boys in school. Majority of the time, teachers tend to pupil label boys as disruptive and attention seekers compared to girls who they label as quite, passive and understanding. This leads to teachers negatively effecting boys as they would rather spend time disciplining boys rather than actually helping them gain knowledge. This leads to boys gaining the self fulfilling prophecy which leads to them internalising these thoughts and hence acting more devious and not trying to actually attain education as much as the girls. Moreover, the independance of girls and career oriented women has led to crisis of masculinity for men in the british society."

20. Question
Evaluate the view that the main function of education is to allocate individuals to appropriate roles. [26]
"Education's main function The view that the main function of education is to allocate individuals to appropriate roles, is a view shared by functionalists, the new right and the social democrats. All these branches of sociology support this views.
Durkheim sees the role of education to teach individuals their appropriate role in society and how to conform to it through sanctions and rewards. But Parsons takes this a step foward by arguing that education serves to allocate individuals to occupations that are most appropriate to level of skill. The school does this by rewarding students with qualifications based on their performance in standardized assesments. Davis and Moore also support this view saying that the education 'sifts, sorts and grades' these individuals into the role in society thy are best suited to. Education makes sure that the ones who are functionally the most able are granted the most functionally important positions in society.
Consequently, social democrats also see the function of education to allocate individuals to their appropriate roles so that economy progresses. They see this function only being met if the education system operates on equal levels which is why in 1965 the comprehensive schooling system was introduced, doing away with the tripartite system which resulted in a wastage of talent as it prevented workcing class children being allowed opportunities to meet their potenial. According to them, a comprehensive schooling system will allow for equal opportunities in mixed stability classroom where the only differentiating factor is educational attainment. To further ensure that this function is being met, they also influenced the introduction of compenstaroy programs like Education Action Zones (EAZ) and sure start, which work to decrease inequalities resulting from class differences. Hence the social democratic view supports and works to maintain the educational function of allocating individuals to appropriate roles.
In addition, the new right also supports this view. Chubb and Moe credit competition created to classrooms that allows students to showcase their full potenial and allow for them to hence allocated to occupations best fit for them. Marketisation policies introduced under the 1988 education reform act, hence serves to maintain this competition through formula funding and open enrolement so that the best are identified and appropriate roles are allocated to them.
Furthermore, the use of IQ tests also support the view that education is an mechanism for appropriate allocation of individuals. Eysenck argues the these tests are objective measure of intelligence and Saunders also agrees by saying that these only reveal innate abilities of the students hence allowing them to allocated to appropriate resources based on their intelligence.
However, Marxist sociologists strongly disagree with such views as according to them the roles that students are allocated into are not appropriately matched to their ability. Rather, marxists like Bowles and Gintis see the education system as legitimizing the already present social order, as educations rewards those who conform but not those who do not. Since the conform to middle class values to succeed, which is also not guaranteed as higher education is most widely only available to the upper classes attained through money, Bowles and Gintis see education as benefitting and allocating suitable roles to the upper and middle class.
Rather than a mechanism for allocation, Marxists see the education as a form of social control with it's function being reproducing existing inequalities. By justifying unequal rewards as legit, they justify unequal class and consequently wealth distribution. Althusser sees education as part of the ideological state appratus which socializes students into ruling class ideologies and leads them to develop false class consciousness. Similarly both Illich and Fine see schools are repressive institutions that reward conformity to middle class values, passivity and a docile nature as a way of inculcating a passive labourforce. Bates & Riseborough note that working class and black minority students are routinely pushed towards vocational qualifications which results to lower paid, low status jobs. Bourdieu sees schools are inherently based on cultural habitus of the upper and middle class, thereby disadvantaging working class children who are at disadvantage even before entering school as a result of their lack of culture capital. Failure in examinations and self-elimination at the hands of the working class is seen as choices made by these individuals and hence justifying their social positions. Bourdieu sees this as a reasonable response as he sees the education system inherently against the interests of working classes. Nevertheless he sees these responses as contributing to legitimizing the existing social order. Ball et al note that white middle class parents possess the right capitals in the right currency which enable them to make the best choices for their children as they have both social connection to get into the best schools and the money to facilitate proper education after.
If the function of allocating was indeed met, this would mean the working classes would experience social mobility, Breen however notes that the most functionally important occupations are defined by social closure or by higher education which most workingclass students cannot attain due to material deprivation.
In conclusion, education cannot compensate for society."


21. Question
Describe two ways the family has become more child-centred. [4]
"One way family has become child centred is because of child protection agencies. As nowadays there are many child protection agencies which lead to parents taking better care of there children due to the fear if the child is mistreated they might be taken away.
Another reason is because of the decrease of children within family. As compared to the 1960s where families had 5-6 children where as now they have 2 or lesser children this has led to parents being able to focus more on them due to the amount of care being deceased because of lesser children."

22. Question
Explain two ways that men benefit more than women from family life. [8]
"One way that men benefit more than women from family life is through emotional benefits. This can be backed up by the warm bath theory by Parsons, which state that the role of the women is to 'de-stress' the man who comes home from work stressed. This provides the man an opportunity to relax and have no burden in their mind. However the man may choose to express his relief in rather violent manners which may disadvantage the women (abuse and domestic violence). And they will have no requirement to look after their children in traditional segregated nuclear families reducing stress further and boosting the man's emotional benefit compared to the woman in the family who gets all these added stress.
Another benefit is that men typically have the upper hand, the most influential voice in the family. This is common in patriarchal families where the key decisions are always taken by the man in a family. The reason behind this could be due to the instrumental roles (parson's) men typically take up in these patriarchal families as then they are seen as the primary earner (the breadwinner) of the family. This disadvantages women as it lowers their power within a family. Therefore why men benefit more as they have increased power."

23. Question
Explain two limitations of radical feminist views of the family. [6]
"One limitation of the radical feminist view is that it does not acknowledge the progress and changes that have been made to improve women's status in family. They believe that family is a patriarchal structure that is based on exploitation of women as domestic labourers. However, many families have now become symmetrical and men and women share economic and domestic responsibilities, which means women are no longer as oppressed as radical feminists claim them to be.
Another limitation of this is that radical feminists ignore the potential benefits women gain through the family. Radical feminists believe that as families are patriarchal at their core women will always be in a disadvantaged position in the family and experience struggles there. However, many women find emotional comfort and love within the family from their partner, parents, and children."

24. Question
Explain two arguments that the extent of family diversity has been exaggerated. [10]
"The extent of family diversity has been exaggerated as the nuclear family still remains dominant within society. Although there is an increase in family diversity, statistics shows that the presence of the nuclear family is still the most common family type. To support this, Robert Chester states that other family types are built around the model of the nuclear family. He proposes the idea of the neo-conventional family, this is ultimately the nuclear family but far more equal with shared conjugal roles and also their being dual earner families. He also suggests that statistics about the nuclear family are misleading, arguing that family diversity is not more dominant than the nuclear family. Therefore, this shows that the extent of family diversity has been exaggerated. This is because although family diversity is on the increase, the nuclear family remains the most popular and common type.
Another way how the extent of family diversity has been exaggerated, is that other family types are only temporary and have not taken over the dominance of the nuclear family. An example of this is cohabitation. This involves people living together but are not yet married. Statistics show that this is on the increase from 20% in 2011, to 25% in 2021. Although, this family type is increasing, it exaggerates the idea of family diversity because people don't choose to live in this family type forever. Cohabitation can be seen as a 'try before you buy', this is the idea that people are in this family form to see whether they want to marry their partner because the act of divorce can be a long and complex process. This shows the extent of family diversity has been exaggerated because people are still choosing to marry and live in nuclear families, however are just delaying it."

25. Question
Assess the view that the extent of family diversity has been exaggerated. [6]
"This view is not true to a great extent. Family diversity in this modern day and age has significantly increased especially in Western societies, which influences other societies too. Beck and Beck-Gernsheim argue that individuals are more likely to reject the social stigma and pressures of getting married and being committed and prefer to live by their own choice. This increased choice refers to the many different options of living such as living alone in an apartment, sharing an apartment, cohabitation, single parent families, reconstituted familes and so on. This demonstrates that individuals are no longer confined to one family structure and can change depending on their circumstances. Huges and Church argue that cohabitation increased by 10% in 1886 and by 25% in 2006. This shows that people are becoming more individualistic and choosing the arrangements that cater to their own needs. Carol Smart suggests that not only are there different arrangements, people experience more than one family type throughout their life course. Therefore, Judith Stacey argues that family diversity is increasing rapidly and here to stay as people will not go back to living in their old ways in a new reflexively modern world where everything is blurred."

26. Question
Evaluate the Marxist explanation of the role of the family. [26]
"With so many diverse views of the role of family, it is not simple to determine which one may be the most suitable. These diverse views include Marxism, with its main focus on the role of family in contribution to economy; functionalism, which focuses upon the ways family overall benefits its members and the society; feminism, focussing on the position of women in family and other perspectives like post-modernism and New Rights.
Marxist explanations of the family mainly state how the family works in order to benefit the bourgeoisie, i.e the ruling class. They focus on the ways family is responsible of maintaining capitalism in the society. This is, firstly, through ideological control. According to Althusser, family is the 'Ideological State Apparatus', which means it is responsible for socialisation of children and instilling in their minds the importance of work and capitalism. Zaretsky argued that family is responsible for socialising children in a way that they are taught the ruling class ideology. This argument gives a good understanding of the family as playing the role of ideological control of its members and children.
Moreover, the Marxist explanations also focus upon the 'consumer role' of the family. They believe that families are mainly responsible for consumerism (Althusser), i.e buying goods and servies rather than producing their own like in the past. Zaretsky also argues that families are mainly the targets of so many brands and advertisements, all of which contributes to the economy and benefits the ruling class. It is also argued by Robertson that families contribute to capitalism as the children of the family have now become consumers due to the blurring of child identities. Therefore, this role of the family as consumers, explained by the Marxists, tells how family plays a significant part in the economy.
Furthermore, Marxist do not fail to recognize the aspects of family life within the households. They also talk about political economy, i.e the role of the family in terms of emotional and financial dependance which leads to contribution to the economy. As per Zaretsky, the family is mainly responsible for pressurizing the men to work, so they can earn and provide for their familes back home. They do not exersise power or dominance in the workplace because they know the importance of working for their families. This way, the bourgeoisie are benefitted, while the family plays the role of maintaining a capitalist structure.
In addition to this, the Marxist explanations to the family roles given by Marxist feminists tend to focus on the position of women in the family while they are exploited by both patriarchy and capitalism. It is a very good explanation, since, unlike radicl feminists, they focus on how capitalism exploits women both in the workplace, due to lower pay for example, and at home, where men benefit from their unpaid domestic labour. It is argued that women act as a 'sponge' absorbing all the male frustrations while they work to earn for their familes. Women are also at a disadvantage since they are a 'reserve army of labour', only called to the workplace when there is a shortage of male workers. They also talk about the 'triple shift', where alongside work - both domestic and at workplace, women are also responsible for providing psychological and emotional support for their families.
Therefore, the overall Marxist evaluation of the role of family mainly relates to its contribution in the capitalism. They neither neglect the fact that family is responsible for primary socialisation of children and nor the fact that women are exploited in familes, however, they give a more economic aspect to each role of the family, while other sociologists may argue otherwise.
According to functionalists, such as Murdock, the main role of the family is providing primary socialisation for children, reproduction, sexual control and economic provision. They argue that a person's biological parents are best suited to their upbringing because they have a personal investment in child's growth and development. In contradiction to the Marxist view, functionalists believe that family is necessary for its members so they can have adequate socialisation, love and support, and its role is positive and it does not only benefit capitalism. As per Parsons, family is responsible for 'stabilisation of adult personalities', which is providing for them psychological and emotional support. The family acts as a 'warm bath' and benefits all its members equally.
Moreover, functionalists like Fletcher also talk about the different types of roles of the family, including core and peripheral functions. He argues that the core functions are only suitable for the family to perform, therefore he gives the explanation of roles of family in terms of upbringing and socialisation rather than benefitting capitalism. New Rights thinkers also believe that family is suitable for producing functional members of the society that conforms to its norms and values. They give evidence on how 'fatherless' children tend to be involved in deviant and criminal activities and are dependant upon State benefits, hence the family is extremely necessary for performing this role for its children.
According to feminists, such as radical feminists, the main role of the family is to exploit women through patriarchy. They talk about official statistics showing records of domestic violence against women and tell that family is a negative experience for women. Some extremists like Greer also state that women are better off without nuclear families, such as in all-women societies or lesbian relationships. They argue that the role of family is not suitable or beneficial for women. Black feminists, however take the alternate view stating that family is a safe haven from racism. Therefore, different feminist perspectives have different views over the role of family.
Lastly, postmodernists believe that family is what someone wants it to be. Weston argues that 'families of choice' are becoming increasingly common. They endorse family diversity, and since they think there is no definite explanation to what a family is, it cannot be determind what the role of a family is. Different family structures can build mutual understanding over what roles they want it to perform.
Conclusively, there are many contradictory views to the explanation that the role of family is to support and promote capitalism given by the Marxists. It is evident that the family has played diverse roles and there have been many changes as well. It would not be fair to say that this is the best explanation for the role of a family, however, in today's capitalist society, it is an adequate explanation."

27. Question
Describe two social characteristics associated with the elderly. [4]
"One social characteristics associated with the elderly is being a grandparent, elderlys are known for it because the word 'elders' are usually tied with grandparents in the family. Another social characteristics associated with the elderly is care takers, many individuals may use their elderly parents as caretakers for their children."

28. Question
Explain two reasons why positivists favour the use of questionnaires. [8]
"Positivists are researchers that prefer quantitative data and methods over qualitative ones. Positivists favour questionnaires as they can be replicated since the questions are fixed and thus, more reliable. whether the questionnaire be open-ended or close-ended, the questions will be the same of for all participants allowing for easy comparision and rechecking. Positivists also favour the use of questionnaires as the close ended questionnaires are pre-coded, while open-ended are coded aftwards. Coding and Operationalisation is beneficial for quantifying abstract ideas. After operationalisation and/or coding, the quantified data can easily be checked for accuracy and validity and be tested to see if the answers provide some sort of objectivity. Since questionnaires are easier to fill online, the sample size may be high thus more representative data."

29. Question
Explain one strength and one limitation of field experiments as a research method. [6]
"One limitation of field experiments as a research method is the lack of reliability. In a field experiment, the researcher has little to no control over the variables, which limits the chances of the results being reliable, meaning they are highly unlikely of being repeatable. Another limitation of field experiments are the ethical concerns surrounding them, especially consent. In a field experiment, the participants don't know that they're being studied, so they're unable to give consent."


30. Question
Explain two ways that cultural deprivation may lead to deviance. [10]
"Cultural deprivation is when individuals receive inadequate cultural exposure and socialisation that provides them the appropriate norms and values to function in society. one way cultural deprivation is the main cause of deviance is because individuals lack cultural capital to integrate into society. Bourdieu suggested that different social classes have different habitus, and these differences affect the level of cultural capital and cultural exposure a person receives. For example, working class individuals are less likely to be exposed to different cultures and societies, either through education or lack of means to interact with other cultures. This means that they would be less likely to internalise views and values that appropriate in society, causing them to act deviant, such as being racist or xenophobic because they were not socialised of the values and beliefs. Another way cultural deprivation is the main cause of deviance is because some families see little importance in teaching their children cultural norms and values. This is more prominent in working class families, where children are often taught by their family to value immediate gratification, whereas those who are more successful in society such as those in middle and upper class would value further education to earn jobs for an income. This creates deviant behaviour in working class individual because they did not receive adequate education that could land them a stable career, resorting to theft and fraudery to earn an income. Furthermore, those in lower working class, as suggested by Murray, could teach children to not value employment and rely on the over generous state that would provide for them, prompting them to reject values of work life."

31. Question
Assess the view that cultural deprivation is the main cause of deviant behaviour. [6]
"One argument against this view is the fact that biology plays a part in explaining deviance. Many Sociologists, including Lombroso, believe that there are biological determinants that lead to individuals becoming deviant. Lombroso conducted a study looking at criminals and found that they often share physical characteristics such as a low forehead. This shows that biology has to have a role in deviant behaviours and that, therefore, cultural deprivation cannot be the most important or main cause of deviant behaviour."

32. Question
Evaluate the view that peers are the most important agent in shaping an individual’s identity. [26]
"This essay will be looking at points that support or disprove the view that peers are the most important agent in shaping an individual's identity. One explanation for the view that peers are the most important agent in shaping identity is the control they have over each other, especially when a subculture is formed. Paul Willis looked at 'the lads', a group of working class boys who formed an anti school subculture based on disrupting class, non conformity, and resisting the socialization/control of the school on them. The lads stayed in line with their norms and values (going against the school) mainly to please each other and for informal positive sanctions, like words of praise or positive non verbal reactions such as laughter, and also out of the fear of ostracism, or being rejected from the group. However, it may be argued that the lads didn't actually care about each other, or the peer group, but kept going out of resentment for the education system, and they only befriended eachother based on their mutual disdain for the school system. One point that disproves this view is that media is actually the most important agent in shaping an individual's identity. Neil Postman said that, in the 20th century and with the gradual decline in printed media like books and newspapers, media largely replaced the family as the main institution of socialization. Potter adds onto this by talking about imitation and social learning, through which children and even early addescents pick up things like language, vocabulary, mannerisms, and more. This makes up a huge amount of a peson's identity. Finally, Jock Young talks about the bulimic society, where media has introduced a culture of 'get rich or die trying' into our society, making individuals put an exaggerated value on consumerism and making it a huge part of their identity, showing us that peers are not the most important agent on shaping an individual's identity but Media. Another explanation for the view that peers are the most important agent in shaping an individual's identity is that peers often look to each other in times of hardship/discrimination to reaffirm and strengthen their collectivist identity. Jacobson looked at British Asian (Pakistani, Bangladeshi, etc.) second generation immigrants and found that in response to the racism from the native white folk, they had formed a stronger muslim identity with each other, going to the mosque together and forming friendships with other muslim immigrants, creating a community. However, this could be evaluated by saying they only came together because they were geographically close, known as neighbourhood nationalism. Another point that disproves that peers are the most important agent in shaping identity is that education is in fact the most important agent. Bowles and Gintis went into a school and found that the hidden curriculum (unspoken things like uniforms and asking for permission to use the bathroom) had socialized kids into obedience and subservience, which would carry over into the workplace (this was called the correspondence principle). As well as this, Becker says school promotes the idea of an ideal pupil, which students are rewarded for imitating and negatively sanctioned for straying from (and this shapes their identity by training them to be obedient, showing that education is the most important agent. One final explanation for the view that peers are the most important agent in shaping identity is cultural comfort groups, where similar people often come together for 'cultural comfort'. Sewell said students of the same ethnicity (black) often hung out together outside of the class room because they were peers with similar characteristics, therefore providing comfort and an ease in socialising/talking to each other. These peers provided emotional stability to each other, showing that peers are the most important agent in shaping identity. However,"


33. Question
Describe two types of interview. [4]
"One type of interview is a structured interview. This type of interview consists of a standardised set of questions that all participants are asked. A second type of interview is an unstructured interview. This is more like a conversation between the researcher and the interviewee where the interviewee can talk freely as there are no set questions."

34. Question
Explain two reasons why some social groups may be more difficult to research than others. [8]
"Researching criminals may be more difficult to study than other groups. Since criminals are engaged in activities which are outside the law and could lead to punishment, they will not want to reveal this to a stranger. James Patrick, who studied Glasgow gangs, was only able to carry out his study as he knew one of the gang members who helped him get into the gang. Being introduced by an existing member of the gang meant it was easier to gain the gang’s trust. Children are another group that may be more difficult to study as there are legal and ethical restrictions on who can work with young people. The children’s parents would need to give consent for them to take part in the research and they may not give this if the research is on a sensitive topic such as bullying."


35. Question
Explain one strength and one limitation of overt participant observation as a research method. [6]
"One strength is that participants know they are being studied so the researcher can ask questions and make notes openly. This will mean they are less likely to forget or lose information gained during the observation. A limitation is that participants may change their behaviour as they know they are being observed by a researcher. This change in behaviour will make the research lower in validity as the researcher is not getting a true indication of their behaviour."


36. Question
Peers are the most important influence in shaping an individual’s identity. Explain this view. [10]
"One way in which peers can influence identity is by reinforcing a social class identity. Paul Willis studied how a group of working-class boys formed a counter-school culture. The ‘lads’ in the study were anti-school. They thought school was boring and meaningless as they aspired to working-class jobs which they saw as ‘real’ work. They did not follow the rules and instead were disruptive and made fun of those who worked hard. Manual labour was seen as more worthy than mental labour by the peer group, reinforcing their working-class identity. Another way in which peers are important in shaping identity is the way in which peers control behaviour. An example of this is seen with the informal controls that peers exert over others in the group. Louise Archer studied the impact of peer control on working-class girls. She found that working-class girls created a hyper-heterosexual feminine identity in order to gain symbolic capital from their peers. To gain this form of capital, which gave them status and popularity, girls were expected to dress in a glamourous way and wear specific brands and styles such as Nike. Those girls who did not adopt the correct style were called ‘tramps’ and would be unpopular with their peers. This shows how peers can be important in controlling attitudes and styles."

37. Question
Peers are the most important influence in shaping an individual’s identity. Using sociological material, give one argument against this view. [6]
"Although peers may be important is shaping identity, in postmodern societies this may be less important. Postmodernists see society as being based on individualism and consumption. The rise of global media and increasing globalisation gives individuals access to a wide range of products and services which can shape identity. This is seen through the rise in New Age beliefs and self-religions including those that are found online. Rather than following ideas and styles from your peers, an individual can use free will to consume products that they choose for their individual identity. The greater the range of products available the more choice and so the individual is able to pick and mix their own identity. The choice may not be similar to those of a similar age group."


38. Question
Evaluate the view that female identity is changing. [26]
"Sociologists disagree on the nature of female identity and the extent to which it is changing. Many feminists argue that female identity is defined in patriarchal terms due to the nature of society. However, others argue that there has been positive change in the way female identity is constructed. In the 21st century there have been changes to the roles of women that have impacted female identity. One change is the increase in achievement in education. This is linked to a number of factors. One of these is women’s increased aspirations. The rise of feminism and campaigns for equal rights for women have meant women now aspire to have careers rather than become housewives. Sue Sharpe’s studies between the 1970s and 1990s show the difference in what girls wanted to achieve between these years. The focus for girls in the 1990s was more on their careers compared to the 1970s where they were focused on finding a husband. Evans refers to this as a form of ‘autonomous femininity’ where women are involved in active competition with men. Autonomous women are likely to be highly educated, successful, and career focussed. This shows that female identity is changing as success in school and the workplace are now a part of female identity. The development of effective contraception and the availability of abortion has also given women reproductive rights. Being able to control when and how many children they have means women are able to make the choice to focus on other aspects of life such as their career. Women can make an individual decision about childbearing which means they can have a more equal status with regard to work. Choosing not to have children means women are better able to compete equally in the workplace as they do not need to take career breaks for children. In addition, changing social views on being childless reduces the stigma for those who do not have children. Overall these changes mean that motherhood is a less significant aspect of female identity. Female identity is also changing as girls are able to construct more flexible identities that may be based around typically masculine features. The rise in popularity of traditionally masculine sports such as football and boxing amongst girls highlights that girls are now able to construct identities around traditionally masculine pursuits. Similarly, Jackson studied a group of working-class girls who displayed what she described as a ‘ladette’ identity based around more traditionally masculine characteristics such as being loud, aggressive, rude, and disruptive in school. This shows that for some girls, identity and behaviour is not constrained by normative femininity, allowing them to experiment with more masculine ways of being female. However, some sociologists have highlighted that these changes do not necessarily mean that female identity is really changing as many aspects of traditional femininity still exert control on women. For example, many studies have shown that although women are working more than in the past, they face a ‘dual burden’ as they are still required to complete the majority of housework and childcare. Other sociologists argue that feminine identities are still framed and shaped by male beliefs and demands. The popularity of Instagram influencers could be interpreted in this way. Although girls may be able to construct identities and achieve financial success, these identities are largely based around traditional feminine ideas of beauty and physical appearance and are, at least to some extent, appealing to male desires. In addition, the changes outlined above are not universal and in some places a traditional female identity is still the norm. For example, contraception and abortion are not universally available and many women still feel social pressure to have children. In some cases, this will disadvantage them in work and careers. For example, in Greece there is very little welfare provision and a woman would have to rely on her husband for support after childbirth. In many cases, government policies reinforce the patriarchal family through taxation, childcare policies and rules around maternity and paternity leave. These can confirm the patriarchal female identity as wife and carer. Overall, despite the improvements in life chances for women and their increased presence in the workplace in many societies, there are still many ways in which a traditional female identity is expected of women. The domestic work and the role of carer are still seen as part of the female identity in many societies and this is often encouraged by the policies and social norms of society."
